---
layout: post
title: "World Cup Final: Seizing the Moments"
subtitle: "Chayan Chakrabarti reminisces about Australia's wins"
date: 2023-11-17 14:13:13 -0400
background: '/img/eden.jpg'
---

*Chayan Chakrabarti*

## Australia: Seizing the Moments
In sports, champions share a few key traits. They have superlative talent, ambition, and execution. But what truly separates them from the pack is the ability to seize key moments. Cricket is no different, and **Australia** have especially demonstrated this trait in their World Cup Final appearances this century.

Australian teams always had talented individuals, from the Ponting/Warne/McGrath/Gilchrist generation to the current Warner/Maxwell/Starc/Cummins generation. But their opponents also boasted all-time greats like Tendulkar, Jayasuria, and Williamson. **Why then have they managed to win 3 of the 5 World Cups this century? Because they consistently manage to seize the key moments.**

A closer look reveals that Australia manages to come out of the gate very hot, and completely outplay the opposition in the first 5 overs, whether batting or bowling. The opponent also plays into their hands by not matching the intensity from the first ball. In Australia's last 3 World Cup finals, both teams were evenly matched in talent and execution for the last 45 overs of each innings. But the imbalance from the first 5 overs ensured that Australia were already on the path to victory. The remaining 90% of the match was the opponent trying to salvage the damage from the initial 10% burst. This is very hard against a talented team with professional execution.

[In the 2003 Final](https://www.hindustantimes.com/india/world-cup-final-over-before-it-had-truly-begun/story-CQDfte4yS7sf7QBcRnlvEP.html), Zaheer Khan had the right intention to be aggressive. But there is a difference between aggression due to confidence, and aggression due to desperation. Zaheer was inexperienced then, and the over-aggression got to his head, causing him to lose the plot and concede 15 runs in the first over. That set the tone for the rest of the match. Harbhajan, Sehwag,. and Co. competed well for the rest of the match, but the match was already lost. [In the 2007 Final](https://www.espncricinfo.com/story/come-to-think-of-it-was-the-2007-world-cup-really-a-disaster-1225670), the rain delay after the toss caused Sri Lanka to drop their intensity. They were not mentally prepared to combat Gilchrist's ferocity, allowing him to race to his half century within the Power Play. Jayasuriya, Sangakkara, and Co. made a valiant effort, and played at a championship level, but the damage was already done and Australia won comfortably. [In the 2015 Final](https://www.nzherald.co.nz/sport/cricket-former-black-caps-captain-brendon-mccullum-opens-up-about-dismissal-in-2015-cricket-world-cup-final/ZFZYVR6S4HEKXN4YPOQY5X6MGQ/), McCullum in a manic bid to seize the initiative early had a brain fade, slogged blindly in the first over with the score on 0, and was clean bowled by Starc for a duck. That sent New Zealand into a shell. Though Elliot and Taylor played like champions, the deficit was too much to make up. In each of these 3 instances, Australia's opponents were equally talented and experienced. But by the time they settled into the match to play at a championship level, Australia had already won.

On Sunday, Rohit, Kohli, Shami, Bumrah, and Co. should be aware of Australia's modus operandi, and be mentally up to the task right from the toss. This is the most talented Indian team ever, with tons of big match experience. That should give them supreme confidence in their ability to outplay Australia. Their only suspected weaknesses are mental toughness, and ability to seize the moment early. 


India should come out with intensity, and confidence, with the right balance of assured aggression, self belief, and calm temperament during the tough stretches. That may still not be enough, as in sport, one can do everything right but still be outplayed by a talented opponent. But let Australia earn their victory. May the best side on the day prevail, and let's all look forward to a memorable day of high quality cricket!

Over 100 overs, in an even contest, India will probably outplay Australia. But only if they haven't already lost the match in the first 5 overs, by being 10/3 if batting or 50/0 if bowling. 
